## High Level Overview

Optimal gameplay in the MMO World of Warcraft (WOW) has been studied fairly
extensively for more than a decade by a number of researchers, collectively
known as "theorycrafters." Over the course of the game's history, and multiple
expansion packs, this community has pieced together tribal knowledge and shared
information on "how to play" each of the game's class and specialization
combinations.

The game has traditionally provided three roles for players to choose. The
highly armored "tanks" actively keep the attacking enemies focused on them,
where as "healers" ensure that the raid group remains alive until end of combat.
The final role, and the one we primarily concern ourselves with, is "direct damagers" -
players whose job it is to deal as much damage as possible to the enemy
non-player-characters. In this role, the traditional metric by which we
distinguish good players from bad players is DPS, or "damage per second".

Like in many other games, there are sub-role classifications within these three
roles (crowd controller, disabler, hybrid heal/damage roles, etc) but these
three (heal, tank, DPS) represent the MMO "holy trinity", and are what most
end-game group content is balanced around.

Although optimization for healing and tanking is certainly an interesting
problem, the performance of players in those roles is much harder to evalute
than the performance of a damage-dealing class. Perhaps future extensions to
policygen could attack the "tanking" problem. I suspect that the healing problem
will require a much more complicated simulation engine (whole-raid, full-combat,
with players taking damage realistically, etc) than we currently have.

It does not always make sense to optimize for "healing per second", as healing
is largely a zero-sum game in high level group play: there is only so much
damage going out to a group, and a finite cadre of healers to handle it. Healers
optimizing for pure throughput will find themselves running out of resources
towards the end of a fight; where healing generally is most important.
Additionally, not all damage is equally important to heal quickly: the relative
danger posed by a 10 damage spike when a player is at 11 health is much higher
than the same 10 damage spike when a player is at 100 health.

Similarly, tanking is not so easily quantifiable: a good tank will both maximize
their chances of staying alive while simultaneously optimizing their damage,
which poses a tradeoff in optimization space: a multi-objective problem with
directly conflicting optimization goals (tanks end up making a gearing choice
between "offensive" and "defensive" profiles). Historically, theorycrafters have
developed policies for playing tanks "defensively" as well as "offensively", but
evaluating the "goodness" of such policies is out of scope for this project.

Given the complexities mentioned above with simulation and optimization for
healers and tanks, we explicitly choose to NOT focus on these roles. Instead, we
concern ourselves in this work with the (already) herculean task of optimization
across gameplay choices for "damage dealing" roles.

In fact, the entirety of policygen can be boiled down to solving the following
problem: for a given (predetermined) fight scenario with scripted enemy behavior,
what choices can a damage dealer make to do as much damage as possible over the
course of that fight? Equivalently, what choices can a damage dealer make to end
a fight as quickly as possible, given access to a fixed pool of gear options?

## Formalization

DPS Optimization is a complicated instance of a classic planning problem, with
an interesting twist. At a very abstract high level, there are effectively two
planning components under the control of a player. These two components are
"pre-combat player configuration" and "gameplay action policy".

The interesting twist in this problem is choices made during the planning phase
tend to affect optimal choices in the action selection phase. For example, some
policies favor gear-configurations with different stat balances or talent
choices (maybe you have a spell that gets better and better with more critical
strike rating on your gear, so you would want to cast that spell more frequently
when you have a lot of crit rating, but almost never if you don't), and some
stat balances and talent choices favor different action policies.

A very specific example of this conundrum (offline planning decisions influence
online action selection) is the Assassination Rogue: there are largely
considered to be two "viable" but distinct approachs to playing the
assassination rogue - the "poison" build and the "bleed" build. The poison build
requires a large amount of mastery, because mastery increases poison damage.  If
the rogue has a random gear configuration, it's unlikely that they would have
enough mastery for the "poison" build to be good, but if they *specifically*
plan on using the poison build, they can set up a gearset with a lot of mastery
to make it better than the "bleed" build.

Another piece of complexity: both of these components (offline- and
online-planning) are thoroughly influenced by parameters of the encounter being
simulated. The theorycrafting community has traditionally constructed different
player configurations and action policies for encounters that feature multiple
persistent enemies ("AOE", or "area of effect", a term meaning an emphasis on
abilities which do damage to multiple targets at once) and encounters that
feature a single, high-health enemy ("Patchwork", named after a classical,
canonical example enemy from the Naxxramas raid). However, this feature has
largely been underutilized, and many players make decisions solely on the
results of a static, one-target encounter that is widely criticized as being
non-representative of a true, in-game combat scenario.

Any new approach to automatically solve the character planning + policy
discovery problems, therefore, must take BOTH pre-fight player configuration and
encounter script parameters into account. The formalization we need to do
optimization in a high-dimensional space is direct: our goal is to maximize the
expected value of the objective function `DPS(online action policy, offline
configuration; encounter parameters)`. Note that we parameterize this function
by encounter parameters: we'll fix the encounter parameters, and attempt to
learn both a good player configuration as well as a good policy to match that
configuration for our particular encounter.

### Player Configuration

First up, players need to make choices about their character before combat ever
begins: these pre-combat choices largely consists of two components.  The first
sub-component can be thought of as "gearing/item usage" and the second
sub-component can be thought of as "talent choice" or specialization.

#### Gearing and Itemization

Players have a number of empty "inventory slots" on their character when it is
first created - these are slots like "helmet", "shoulders", "rings", "trinkets",
"weapons", etc. A complete "gear configuration" is a mapping from each slot to a
corresponding item that is equippable in that slot. Each damage specialization
is constrained to using a subset of gear: a fury warrior generally does not wear
cloth armor, and a shadow priest generally does not use a shield. Many items
have synergistic effects with other items (i.e.  item "tier sets" may impact
gameplay in major ways: traditionally, the role of "raid tier set bonuses" has
been to provide a gameplay-changing bonus to a specific player ability).

Additionally, some items (usually trinkets or weapons) have a random chance
during combat to produce a magical effect. Some items have an "on-use" ability
that provides a powerful effect whose timing is controllable by a player.

Some items (legendary items) impact the behavior of player abilities entirely,
and can provide a static on-equip effect similar in strength to player talents
(see later section for more).

Most pieces of gear provide some amount of "primary stat" (intellect, agility,
or strength) and some amount of "secondary stats" (versatility, mastery,
critical strike, or haste). Each damage dealing specialization has a different
interaction with these stats, but in combination, they form the core of player
power progression: your character gets stronger only when you get better items.

Finally, players can use non-equippable consumable items, like food, augmenting
runes, flasks, scrolls, and numerous other consumable items to get combat buffs.

Potions are a particularly impactful consumable that, due to a quirk of history,
can be chugged once right before combat begins, and then again during combat.
For clarity and historical congruence, we separate the use of a combat-potion
into the "online action policy" component, as the timing of this use is an
important player choice! The rest of the consumables (flask, runes, food,
pre-pot, etc) can safely be baked into the pre-combat "player configuration"
component.

#### Talents

Players have a choices of "talents" which further customize their
specialization. In the current implementation, characters can select one talent
from several rows of three choices each. This form of customization provides
*OUTSIZED* amounts of control on both optimal gearing as well as optimal policy
selection. Some talents grant new abilities to the player, while others modify
the behavior of existing abilities completely. Some talents are better suited to
multiple target combat, and other talents are optimized for single target
damage. Players can only choose their talents before combat starts. In practice,
some talents do not effect combat or damage meaningfully, and their impact can
be ignored. This will help prune the search space a bit.

### Encounter Configuration

An encounter is essentially a script that specifies which targets are active at
any given time, as well as when the player is moving or unable to attack said
targets. We draw a lot of inspiration from the AskMrRobot fight encounter
scripting system, which models the domain very cleanly.

### Action Policy

The core of this project involves deep reinforcement-learning on this component.

An `action policy` represents a mapping from game-state to action taken.  For
each pair of (gearing configuration, encounter parameters), we seek to identify
an optimal mapping of `state` to `action`. We formulate this problem as a
classic "Markov Decision Problem": from each state `S`, there are a number of
available actions `a`: for example, you might wait 1ms, or use ability X, use
ability Y, etc. Each of these actions `a` has a transition probability of
putting us in each of several new states `S'`. We derive reward `R` from taking
action `a` in state `S`: this is the damage value of the action at the time it
was taken.  Finally, we discount future rewards by an exponential decay
parameterized by `gamma` in order to bias the learning towards immediate
payback.

The goal of the Markov Decision Problem is to formally identify the action for
each state that maximizes the gamma-discounted reward in the limit as time goes
to infinity. This is a good match for our problem domain, and we choose to
utilize the same formulation for identifying the optimal policy.

One technique in reinforcement learning is Q-learning: rather than learn
directly "which action is optimal for this state?" and proceeding recursively
from there, an equivalent formulation is "what states are the best states to
find yourself, in general?" and choose the actions that lead to those states.
Google has famously used this technique to great effect to learn how to play the
game GO as well as top human experts.


### Deep Learning Model
Using the standard terminology, we have an efficient oracle that computes
V^{pi} (s) - the value of a state, using a fixed policy -- this is exactly our
simulation service.
